README.md, before:

# causal-dynamical-triangulations

[![CI](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![rust-clippy analyze](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/rust-clippy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/rust-clippy.yml)
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/graph/badge.svg?token=CsbOJBypGC)](https://codecov.io/gh/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations)
[![Kani CI](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/kani.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/kani.yml)
[![Audit dependencies](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/audit.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/audit.yml)

Causal Dynamical Triangulations for quantum gravity in [Rust], built on fast Delaunay triangulation primitives.

## 🌌 Introduction

This library implements **Causal Dynamical Triangulations (CDT)** in [Rust]. CDT is a non-perturbative approach to quantum gravity that constructs
discrete spacetime as triangulated manifolds with causal structure, providing a computational framework for studying quantum gravity phenomenology.

For an introduction to Causal Dynamical Triangulations, see [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0105267).

The library leverages high-performance [Delaunay triangulation] backends and provides a complete toolkit for CDT research and exploration.

## ✨ Features

- [x] 2D Causal Dynamical Triangulations with time-foliation
- [x] Metropolis-Hastings Monte Carlo simulation
- [x] Regge action calculation with configurable coupling constants
- [x] Ergodic moves (Alexander/Pachner moves) with causal constraints
- [x] Command-line interface for simulation workflows
- [x] Formal verification using [Kani] model checker
- [x] Comprehensive benchmarking and performance analysis
- [x] Cross-platform compatibility (Linux, macOS, Windows)

See [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) for details.

## 🚧 Project Status

Early development - API and data structures may change. The library currently supports 2D CDT with plans for 3D and 4D extensions.

**Why Rust for CDT?**

- **Memory safety** for large-scale simulations
- **Zero-cost abstractions** for performance-critical geometry operations  
- **Formal verification** support via [Kani] for mathematical correctness
- **Rich ecosystem** for scientific computing and parallel processing

## 🤝 How to Contribute

We welcome contributions! Here's a 30-second quickstart:

```bash
# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations.git
cd causal-dynamical-triangulations

# Traditional approach
cargo build && cargo test

# Modern approach (recommended) - install just command runner
cargo install just
just setup           # Complete environment setup (includes Kani)
just dev             # Quick development cycle: format, lint, test
just --list          # See all available development commands

# Run examples
just run-example     # Basic simulation
./examples/scripts/basic_simulation.sh      # Shell script example
./examples/scripts/parameter_sweep.sh       # Temperature sweep study
```

**Just Workflows:**

- `just dev` - Quick development cycle (format, lint, test)
- `just quality` - Comprehensive code quality checks
- `just commit-check` - Full pre-commit validation
- `just ci` - Simulate CI pipeline locally (requires Kani)

## 📋 Examples

### Library Usage

See [`examples/basic_cdt.rs`](examples/basic_cdt.rs) for a complete working example:

```rust
use causal_dynamical_triangulations::{
    CdtConfig, MetropolisConfig, ActionConfig, MetropolisAlgorithm,
    geometry::CdtTriangulation2D,
};

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Create triangulation from random points
    let triangulation = CdtTriangulation2D::from_random_points(20, 1, 2)?;
    
    // Configure Monte Carlo simulation
    let metropolis_config = MetropolisConfig::new(1.0, 1000, 100, 10);
    let action_config = ActionConfig::default();
    let mut algorithm = MetropolisAlgorithm::new(metropolis_config, action_config);
    
    // Run simulation
    let results = algorithm.run(triangulation);
    
    println!("Acceptance rate: {:.3}", results.acceptance_rate());
    println!("Average action: {:.3}", results.average_action());
    Ok(())
}
```

### Command Line Interface

```bash
# Build the binary
cargo build --release

# Run a basic simulation
./target/release/cdt-rs --vertices 20 --timeslices 10 --steps 2000 --simulate

# Parameter sweep for phase transition studies
./target/release/cdt-rs \
  --vertices 50 --timeslices 12 \
  --temperature 1.5 --coupling-0 0.8 \
  --steps 5000 --simulate
```

### Ready-to-Use Scripts

The `examples/scripts/` directory contains research workflows:

- **`basic_simulation.sh`** - Simple test run and validation
- **`parameter_sweep.sh`** - Temperature sweep for phase transition analysis  
- **`performance_test.sh`** - Performance benchmarking across system sizes

For detailed documentation, sample output, and usage instructions for each script, see [examples/scripts/README.md](examples/scripts/README.md).

For comprehensive CLI documentation and advanced usage patterns, see [`docs/CLI_EXAMPLES.md`](docs/CLI_EXAMPLES.md).

## 📋 Benchmarking

Comprehensive performance benchmarks using [Criterion]:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
cargo bench

# Specific benchmark categories
cargo bench triangulation_creation
cargo bench metropolis_simulation
cargo bench action_calculations

# Performance regression testing
just perf-check          # Check for performance regressions
just perf-baseline       # Save performance baseline
just perf-report         # Generate detailed performance report
just perf-trends 7       # Analyze performance trends over 7 days
```

See [`benches/README.md`](benches/README.md) for benchmark details and
[`docs/PERFORMANCE_TESTING.md`](docs/PERFORMANCE_TESTING.md) for comprehensive
performance testing workflow documentation.

## 🔒 Formal Verification

The library uses [Kani] model checker for formal verification of critical properties:

```bash
# Run all proofs
just kani

# Fast verification (subset of proofs)
just kani-fast

# Individual harnesses
cargo kani --harness verify_action_config
```

## 🛣️ Roadmap

- [x] Integrate an existing Rust **Delaunay** triangulation library (e.g., [`delaunay`](https://crates.io/crates/delaunay))
- [x] 2D Delaunay triangulation scaffold
- [x] Model‑checking with **[Kani](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/install-guide.html)** for core invariants
- [ ] 1+1 foliation (causal time‑slicing)
- [ ] 2D ergodic moves (Alexander/Pachner moves with causal constraints)
- [ ] 2D Metropolis–Hastings
- [ ] Diffusion‑accelerated MCMC (exploration)
- [ ] Basic visualization hooks (export to common mesh formats)
- [ ] 3D Delaunay + 2+1 foliation + moves + M–H
- [ ] 4D Delaunay + 3+1 foliation + moves + M–H
- [ ] Mass initialization via **Constrained Delaunay** in 3D/4D
- [ ] Shortest paths & geodesic distance
- [ ] Curvature estimates / Einstein tensor (discrete Regge‑like observables)

## Design notes

- **Separation of concerns**: geometry primitives (Delaunay/Voronoi) are decoupled from CDT dynamics.
- **Foliation‑aware data model**: explicit time labels; space‑like vs time‑like edges encoded in types.
- **Testing**: unit + property tests; Kani proofs for invariants (e.g., move reversibility, manifoldness).

For comprehensive guidelines on contributing, development environment setup,
testing, and project structure, please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

This includes information about:

- Building and testing the library
- Running benchmarks and performance analysis
- Code style and standards
- Submitting changes and pull requests
- Project structure and development tools

## 📚 References

For a comprehensive list of academic references and bibliographic citations
used throughout the library, see [REFERENCES.md](REFERENCES.md).

This includes foundational work on:

- Causal Dynamical Triangulations theory
- Monte Carlo methods in quantum gravity
- Computational geometry and Delaunay triangulations
- Discrete approaches to general relativity

## 📝 License

This project's license is specified in [LICENSE](LICENSE).

---

[Rust]: https://rust-lang.org
[Delaunay triangulation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delaunay_triangulation
[Kani]: https://model-checking.github.io/kani/
[Criterion]: https://github.com/bheisler/criterion.rs

Commit message:

Adds: Kani CI workflow and Python linting to justfile
Adds a Kani CI workflow for formal verification, including fast and
full verification jobs. Also, introduces Python linting with Ruff to
the justfile for code quality checks.

Updates the setup process to include Python linting tools and
configures the pyproject.toml file with Ruff dependencies. Enhances
the README with Kani workflow behavior details.

Refs: feature/testing-and-performance-infrastructure

README.md, after:

# causal-dynamical-triangulations

[![CI](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![rust-clippy analyze](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/rust-clippy.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/rust-clippy.yml)
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/graph/badge.svg?token=CsbOJBypGC)](https://codecov.io/gh/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations)
[![Kani CI](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/kani.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/kani.yml)
[![Audit dependencies](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/audit.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations/actions/workflows/audit.yml)

Causal Dynamical Triangulations for quantum gravity in [Rust], built on fast Delaunay triangulation primitives.

## 🌌 Introduction

This library implements **Causal Dynamical Triangulations (CDT)** in [Rust]. CDT is a non-perturbative approach to quantum gravity that constructs
discrete spacetime as triangulated manifolds with causal structure, providing a computational framework for studying quantum gravity phenomenology.

For an introduction to Causal Dynamical Triangulations, see [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0105267).

The library leverages high-performance [Delaunay triangulation] backends and provides a complete toolkit for CDT research and exploration.

## ✨ Features

- [x] 2D Causal Dynamical Triangulations with time-foliation
- [x] Metropolis-Hastings Monte Carlo simulation
- [x] Regge action calculation with configurable coupling constants
- [x] Ergodic moves (Alexander/Pachner moves) with causal constraints
- [x] Command-line interface for simulation workflows
- [x] Formal verification using [Kani] model checker
- [x] Comprehensive benchmarking and performance analysis
- [x] Cross-platform compatibility (Linux, macOS, Windows)

See [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) for details.

## 🚧 Project Status

Early development - API and data structures may change. The library currently supports 2D CDT with plans for 3D and 4D extensions.

**Why Rust for CDT?**

- **Memory safety** for large-scale simulations
- **Zero-cost abstractions** for performance-critical geometry operations  
- **Formal verification** support via [Kani] for mathematical correctness
- **Rich ecosystem** for scientific computing and parallel processing

## 🤝 How to Contribute

We welcome contributions! Here's a 30-second quickstart:

```bash
# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/acgetchell/causal-dynamical-triangulations.git
cd causal-dynamical-triangulations

# Traditional approach
cargo build && cargo test

# Modern approach (recommended) - install just command runner
cargo install just
just setup           # Complete environment setup (includes Kani)
just dev             # Quick development cycle: format, lint, test
just --list          # See all available development commands

# Run examples
just run-example     # Basic simulation
./examples/scripts/basic_simulation.sh      # Shell script example
./examples/scripts/parameter_sweep.sh       # Temperature sweep study
```

**Just Workflows:**

- `just dev` - Quick development cycle (format, lint, test)
- `just quality` - Comprehensive code quality checks
- `just commit-check` - Full pre-commit validation
- `just ci` - Simulate CI pipeline locally (requires Kani)

## 📋 Examples

### Library Usage

See [`examples/basic_cdt.rs`](examples/basic_cdt.rs) for a complete working example:

```rust
use causal_dynamical_triangulations::{
    CdtConfig, MetropolisConfig, ActionConfig, MetropolisAlgorithm,
    geometry::CdtTriangulation2D,
};

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Create triangulation from random points
    let triangulation = CdtTriangulation2D::from_random_points(20, 1, 2)?;
    
    // Configure Monte Carlo simulation
    let metropolis_config = MetropolisConfig::new(1.0, 1000, 100, 10);
    let action_config = ActionConfig::default();
    let mut algorithm = MetropolisAlgorithm::new(metropolis_config, action_config);
    
    // Run simulation
    let results = algorithm.run(triangulation);
    
    println!("Acceptance rate: {:.3}", results.acceptance_rate());
    println!("Average action: {:.3}", results.average_action());
    Ok(())
}
```

### Command Line Interface

```bash
# Build the binary
cargo build --release

# Run a basic simulation
./target/release/cdt-rs --vertices 20 --timeslices 10 --steps 2000 --simulate

# Parameter sweep for phase transition studies
./target/release/cdt-rs \
  --vertices 50 --timeslices 12 \
  --temperature 1.5 --coupling-0 0.8 \
  --steps 5000 --simulate
```

### Ready-to-Use Scripts

The `examples/scripts/` directory contains research workflows:

- **`basic_simulation.sh`** - Simple test run and validation
- **`parameter_sweep.sh`** - Temperature sweep for phase transition analysis  
- **`performance_test.sh`** - Performance benchmarking across system sizes

For detailed documentation, sample output, and usage instructions for each script, see [examples/scripts/README.md](examples/scripts/README.md).

For comprehensive CLI documentation and advanced usage patterns, see [`docs/CLI_EXAMPLES.md`](docs/CLI_EXAMPLES.md).

## 📋 Benchmarking

Comprehensive performance benchmarks using [Criterion]:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
cargo bench

# Specific benchmark categories
cargo bench triangulation_creation
cargo bench metropolis_simulation
cargo bench action_calculations

# Performance regression testing
just perf-check          # Check for performance regressions
just perf-baseline       # Save performance baseline
just perf-report         # Generate detailed performance report
just perf-trends 7       # Analyze performance trends over 7 days
```

See [`benches/README.md`](benches/README.md) for benchmark details and
[`docs/PERFORMANCE_TESTING.md`](docs/PERFORMANCE_TESTING.md) for comprehensive
performance testing workflow documentation.

## 🔒 Formal Verification

The library uses [Kani] model checker for formal verification of critical properties:

```bash
# Run all proofs (runs per harness matrix in CI on main and scheduled jobs)
just kani

# Fast verification (single critical harness, default on pull requests)
just kani-fast

# Individual harnesses
cargo kani --harness verify_action_config
cargo kani --harness verify_regge_action_properties
```

### Workflow behavior

- Pull requests run the fast harness set for quick feedback.
- Pushes to `main` (and manual dispatch) run every harness in parallel via GitHub Actions matrix jobs.

## 🛣️ Roadmap

- [x] Integrate an existing Rust **Delaunay** triangulation library (e.g., [`delaunay`](https://crates.io/crates/delaunay))
- [x] 2D Delaunay triangulation scaffold
- [x] Model‑checking with **[Kani](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/install-guide.html)** for core invariants
- [ ] 1+1 foliation (causal time‑slicing)
- [ ] 2D ergodic moves (Alexander/Pachner moves with causal constraints)
- [ ] 2D Metropolis–Hastings
- [ ] Diffusion‑accelerated MCMC (exploration)
- [ ] Basic visualization hooks (export to common mesh formats)
- [ ] 3D Delaunay + 2+1 foliation + moves + M–H
- [ ] 4D Delaunay + 3+1 foliation + moves + M–H
- [ ] Mass initialization via **Constrained Delaunay** in 3D/4D
- [ ] Shortest paths & geodesic distance
- [ ] Curvature estimates / Einstein tensor (discrete Regge‑like observables)

## Design notes

- **Separation of concerns**: geometry primitives (Delaunay/Voronoi) are decoupled from CDT dynamics.
- **Foliation‑aware data model**: explicit time labels; space‑like vs time‑like edges encoded in types.
- **Testing**: unit + property tests; Kani proofs for invariants (e.g., move reversibility, manifoldness).

For comprehensive guidelines on contributing, development environment setup,
testing, and project structure, please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

This includes information about:

- Building and testing the library
- Running benchmarks and performance analysis
- Code style and standards
- Submitting changes and pull requests
- Project structure and development tools

## 📚 References

For a comprehensive list of academic references and bibliographic citations
used throughout the library, see [REFERENCES.md](REFERENCES.md).

This includes foundational work on:

- Causal Dynamical Triangulations theory
- Monte Carlo methods in quantum gravity
- Computational geometry and Delaunay triangulations
- Discrete approaches to general relativity

## 📝 License

This project's license is specified in [LICENSE](LICENSE).

---

[Rust]: https://rust-lang.org
[Delaunay triangulation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delaunay_triangulation
[Kani]: https://model-checking.github.io/kani/
[Criterion]: https://github.com/bheisler/criterion.rs
