docs/testing.md, before:

# Test Coverage Analysis and Improvement Suggestions

## Current Test Coverage Assessment

### Existing Tests

- **Integration tests** (`tests/integration_tests.rs`): 9 tests covering simulation workflows, topology, caching, error handling
- **CLI tests** (`tests/cli.rs`): 5 tests for command-line interface
- **Unit tests**: Scattered across modules with varying coverage

### Coverage Gaps Identified

## 1. **Critical: Missing Ergodic Moves Tests**

**Issue**: Ergodic moves (2,2), (1,3), (3,1), edge flips are placeholders and not properly tested with actual Tds operations.

**Recommendations**:

- Add tests for actual edge flips on Delaunay triangulations
- Test move validation (when moves should be rejected)
- Test that moves preserve Delaunay property
- Test causality constraint checks
- Add integration tests for move sequences

**File**: [`src/cdt/ergodic_moves.rs`](src/cdt/ergodic_moves.rs:172)

## 2. **Geometry Trait Operations Not Tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`insert_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:186) - vertex insertion
- [`remove_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:195) - vertex removal
- [`move_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:204) - vertex movement
- [`flip_edge()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:215) - edge flipping
- [`subdivide_face()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:228) - face subdivision

**File**: [`src/geometry/backends/delaunay.rs`](src/geometry/backends/delaunay.rs:363-430)

## 3. **Error Handling Coverage Gaps**

**Missing error tests**:

- Invalid parameter ranges (negative values, overflow)
- Delaunay generation failures with specific error contexts
- Action calculation errors with edge cases
- Concurrent modification scenarios

**File**: [`src/errors.rs`](src/errors.rs:1)

## 4. **Metropolis Algorithm Edge Cases**

**Missing tests for**:

- Temperature extremes (T → 0, T → ∞)
- Zero-step simulations
- Different thermalization ratios
- Measurement frequency edge cases
- Action calculation with extreme values

**File**: [`src/cdt/metropolis.rs`](src/cdt/metropolis.rs:175)

## 5. **CdtTriangulation Validation Not Tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`validate_cdt_properties()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:183)
- [`validate_topology()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:212)
- [`validate_causality()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:247) - currently placeholder
- [`validate_foliation()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:275) - currently placeholder
- Simulation history tracking
- Cache invalidation edge cases

**File**: [`src/cdt/triangulation.rs`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:88)

## 6. **Mock Backend Under-tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`adjacent_faces()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:166) - returns empty
- [`incident_edges()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:174) - returns empty
- [`face_neighbors()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:182) - returns empty
- Full mutation operations testing

**File**: [`src/geometry/backends/mock.rs`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:11)

## 7. **Geometry Operations Module**

**Missing tests for**:

- All operations in [`src/geometry/operations.rs`](src/geometry/operations.rs:1)
- No unit tests exist for this module

## 8. **Property-Based Tests Missing**

**Recommendations**:

- Add property-based tests using `proptest` or `quickcheck`
- Test invariants: Euler characteristic, Delaunay property preservation
- Test move reversibility where applicable
- Test action calculation properties

## 9. **Performance/Stress Tests**

**Missing**:

- Large triangulation performance (>1000 vertices)
- Memory usage under load
- Edge counting performance with large meshes
- Long simulation runs

## 10. **Documentation Tests**

**Missing**:

- Doc examples in public API functions
- Only one `#[doc]` example exists (marked `no_run`)

## Priority Recommendations

### HIGH PRIORITY

1. **Implement actual ergodic moves** and test with Tds
2. **Test all TriangulationMut operations** (currently stubs returning errors)
3. **Add validation tests** for CDT properties
4. **Test error propagation** end-to-end

### MEDIUM PRIORITY

1. Add property-based tests for invariants
2. Test edge cases in Metropolis algorithm
3. Complete mock backend implementation tests
4. Add geometry operations tests

### LOW PRIORITY

1. Add performance/stress tests
2. Add comprehensive doc examples

## Suggested Test Files to Create

1. `tests/ergodic_moves_integration.rs` - Full ergodic moves testing
2. `tests/geometry_operations.rs` - Geometry trait operation tests
3. `tests/property_tests.rs` - Property-based testing
4. `tests/validation_tests.rs` - CDT validation tests
5. `tests/performance_tests.rs` - Benchmark and stress tests

## Code Coverage Goals

- **Target**: 80%+ line coverage
- **Critical paths**: 95%+ coverage (action calculation, Metropolis core)
- **Error paths**: 70%+ coverage
- **Edge cases**: Document untestable scenarios

## Next Steps

1. Run `cargo tarpaulin --out Html` to generate detailed HTML coverage report
2. Prioritize testing unimplemented TriangulationMut operations
3. Add integration tests for complete simulation workflows with moves
4. Set up CI to track coverage trends over time

Commit message:

Changed: Enhances testing and performance infrastructure
Improves performance analysis workflow with more robust
benchmarking and reporting. Includes workflow updates
with better compilation validation and error handling,
adds coverage reporting, and includes new CI checks.
Includes updates to `.gitignore` and `justfile`
to support new tooling. (Internal change)

docs/testing.md, after:

# Test Coverage Analysis and Improvement Suggestions

## Current Test Coverage Assessment

### Existing Tests

- **Integration tests** (`tests/integration_tests.rs`): 9 tests covering simulation workflows, topology, caching, error handling
- **CLI tests** (`tests/cli.rs`): 5 tests for command-line interface
- **Unit tests**: Scattered across modules with varying coverage

### Coverage Gaps Identified

## 1. **Critical: Missing Ergodic Moves Tests**

**Issue**: Ergodic moves (2,2), (1,3), (3,1), edge flips are placeholders and not properly tested with actual Tds operations.

**Recommendations**:

- Add tests for actual edge flips on Delaunay triangulations
- Test move validation (when moves should be rejected)
- Test that moves preserve Delaunay property
- Test causality constraint checks
- Add integration tests for move sequences

**File**: [`src/cdt/ergodic_moves.rs`](src/cdt/ergodic_moves.rs:172)

## 2. **Geometry Trait Operations Not Tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`insert_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:186) - vertex insertion
- [`remove_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:195) - vertex removal
- [`move_vertex()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:204) - vertex movement
- [`flip_edge()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:215) - edge flipping
- [`subdivide_face()`](src/geometry/traits.rs:228) - face subdivision

**File**: [`src/geometry/backends/delaunay.rs`](src/geometry/backends/delaunay.rs:363-430)

## 3. **Error Handling Coverage Gaps**

**Missing error tests**:

- Invalid parameter ranges (negative values, overflow)
- Delaunay generation failures with specific error contexts
- Action calculation errors with edge cases
- Concurrent modification scenarios

**File**: [`src/errors.rs`](src/errors.rs:1)

## 4. **Metropolis Algorithm Edge Cases**

**Missing tests for**:

- Temperature extremes (T → 0, T → ∞)
- Zero-step simulations
- Different thermalization ratios
- Measurement frequency edge cases
- Action calculation with extreme values

**File**: [`src/cdt/metropolis.rs`](src/cdt/metropolis.rs:175)

## 5. **CdtTriangulation Validation Not Tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`validate_cdt_properties()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:183)
- [`validate_topology()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:212)
- [`validate_causality()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:247) - currently placeholder
- [`validate_foliation()`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:275) - currently placeholder
- Simulation history tracking
- Cache invalidation edge cases

**File**: [`src/cdt/triangulation.rs`](src/cdt/triangulation.rs:88)

## 6. **Mock Backend Under-tested**

**Missing tests for**:

- [`adjacent_faces()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:166) - returns empty
- [`incident_edges()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:174) - returns empty
- [`face_neighbors()`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:182) - returns empty
- Full mutation operations testing

**File**: [`src/geometry/backends/mock.rs`](src/geometry/backends/mock.rs:11)

## 7. **Geometry Operations Module**

**Missing tests for**:

- All operations in [`src/geometry/operations.rs`](src/geometry/operations.rs:1)
- No unit tests exist for this module

## 8. **Property-Based Tests Missing**

**Recommendations**:

- Add property-based tests using `proptest` or `quickcheck`
- Test invariants: Euler characteristic, Delaunay property preservation
- Test move reversibility where applicable
- Test action calculation properties

## 9. **Performance/Stress Tests**

**Missing**:

- Large triangulation performance (>1000 vertices)
- Memory usage under load
- Edge counting performance with large meshes
- Long simulation runs

## 10. **Documentation Tests**

**Missing**:

- Doc examples in public API functions
- Only one `#[doc]` example exists (marked `no_run`)

## Priority Recommendations

### HIGH PRIORITY

1. **Implement actual ergodic moves** and test with Tds
2. **Test all TriangulationMut operations** (currently stubs returning errors)
3. **Add validation tests** for CDT properties
4. **Test error propagation** end-to-end

### MEDIUM PRIORITY

1. Add property-based tests for invariants
2. Test edge cases in Metropolis algorithm
3. Complete mock backend implementation tests
4. Add geometry operations tests

### LOW PRIORITY

1. Add performance/stress tests
2. Add comprehensive doc examples

## Suggested Test Files to Create

1. `tests/ergodic_moves_integration.rs` - Full ergodic moves testing
2. `tests/geometry_operations.rs` - Geometry trait operation tests
3. `tests/property_tests.rs` - Property-based testing
4. `tests/validation_tests.rs` - CDT validation tests
5. `tests/performance_tests.rs` - Benchmark and stress tests

## Code Coverage Goals

- **Target**: 80%+ line coverage
- **Critical paths**: 95%+ coverage (action calculation, Metropolis core)
- **Error paths**: 70%+ coverage
- **Edge cases**: Document untestable scenarios

## GitHub Actions Validation

To lint all workflow files before pushing changes, run:

```bash
just action-lint
```

This command requires the [`actionlint`](https://github.com/rhysd/actionlint) binary (available via Homebrew) and validates every workflow in `.github/workflows/`.

## Next Steps

1. Run `just coverage` to regenerate `tarpaulin-report.json` (HTML output lives in `target/tarpaulin/`) and use `just coverage-report`
   for a quick JSON summary whenever that file is available. If you only need the summary and the JSON already exists,
   you can skip regenerating coverage.
2. Prioritize testing unimplemented TriangulationMut operations
3. Add integration tests for complete simulation workflows with moves
4. Set up CI to track coverage trends over time
